The designer analysis of algorithms is
the interplay between on the one hand
general principles and on the other hand
its stantiations of those principles to
solve specific problems.
While there's no silver bullet in
algorithm design, no one technique which
solves every computational problem that's
ever going to come up. There are general
design principles which have proven
useful over and over again over the
decades for solving problems that arise
in different application domains.
Those, of course, are the principles that
we focus on in this class.
For example, in part one we studied the
divide and conquer algorithm design
paradigm, principles of graph search
amongst others.
On the other hand, we study specific
substantiations of these techniques. So
in part one, we studied divide and
conquer and how it applies to say,
Strassen matrix multiplication, merge
short and quicksort.
In graph search, we culminated with the
rightfully famous Dijkstra's algorithm
for computing shortest paths.
This, of course, is useful not just,
because as any card-carrying computer
scientist or programmer, you want to know
about what these algorithms are and what
they do, but it also gives us a toolbox,
a suite of four free primitives, which we
can apply to our own computational
problems as a building block in some
larger program.
Part two of the course will continue this
narrative.
We'll learn very general algorithm
paradigms.
Like greedy algorithms, dynamic
programming algorithms and many
applications, including a number of
algorithms for the greatest hits
compilation.
And in this video and the next, I want to
whet your appetite for what's to come, by
plucking out two of the applications that
we'll study in detail later in the
course.
Specifically, in the dynamic programming
section of the course.
First of all, for both of these problems,
I think their importance is self evident.
I don't think I'll have to really discuss
why these are interesting problems.
Why, in some sense, we really need to
solve these two problems.
Secondly, these are quite tricky
computational problems.
And I would expect that most of you do
not currently know good algorithms for
these problems and it would be
challenging to design one.
Third, by the end of this class you will
know efficient algorithms for both of
these problems.
In fact, you'll know something much
better.
You'll know general algorithm design
techniques which solve as a special case
these two problems and have the potential
to solve problems coming up in your own
projects as well.
And one comment before we get started on
these two videos.
They're both at a higher level than most
of the class, by which I mean there won't
be any equations or math.
There won't be any concrete pseudo-code,
and I'll be glossing over lots of
details.
The point is just to convey the spirit of
what we're going to be studying, and to
illustrate the range of applications of
the techniques that we're going to learn.
So what I want to talk about first is
distributed shortest path routing and why
it is fundamental to how the internet
works.
So let me begin with a kind of non very
mathematical claim.
I claim that we can usefully think of the
internet as a graph, as a collection of
verticies and a collection of edges.
So this is clearly an, clearly an
ambiguous statement.
There's many things I might mean as we'll
discuss.
But here's the primary interpretation I
want you to have for this particular
video.
So to specify this, the vertices I intend
to be the end-hosts and the routers of
the internet.
So machines that generate traffic,
machines that consume traffic, and
machines that help traffic get from one
place to another.
So the edges are going to be directed and
they are meant to represent physical or
wireless connections indicating that one
machine can talk directly to another one
by either a physical link between the two
or a direct wireless connection.
So it's common that you'll have edges in
both directions, so that if machine A can
talk to machine B directly, then also
machine B can talk directly to machine A,
but you definitely want to allow the
possibility of asymmetric communication.
So, for example, imagine I send an email
from my Stanford account to one of my old
mentors at Cornell, where I did my
graduate studies.
So this piece of data, this email, has to
somehow migrate from my machine local at
Stanford to my mentor's machine over at
Cornell.
So how does that actually happen?
Well, initially there's a phase of, sort
of local transportation, so, this piece
of data has to get from my local machine
to a place within the Stanford network
that can talk to the rest of the world.
Just like if I was trying to travel to
Cornell, I would have to first use local
transportation to get to San Francisco
airport and only from there could I take
an airplane.
So this machine from which data can
escape from the Stanford network to the
outside world is called the gateway
router.
The Stanford gateway router passes it on
to a networks, whose job is to cross the
country.
So last I checked, the commercial
internet service provider of Stanford was
Cogent so they, of course, have their own
gateway router which can talk to the
Stanford one and vice versa.
And of course, these two nodes and the
edges between them are just this tiny,
tiny, tiny piece embedded in this massive
graph, comprising all the end hosts and
routers of the internet.
So that's the main version of a graph
that we're going to talk about in this
video, but let me just pause to mention a
couple of other graphs that are related
to the internet, and quite interesting in
their own right.
So one graph that is generated an
enormous amount of an interest in study
is the graph induces by the web.
So here, the vertices are going to
represent web pages and the edges which
is certainly directed represent
hyperlinks.
Not one web page points to another one.
So for example, my homepage is one node
in this massive, massive graph.
And as you might expect, there is a link
from my home page to the course page for
this class.
It is of course essential to use directed
edges to faithfully model the web.
There is for example, no directed edge
from this courses homepage to my own
homepage at Stanford.
So the web really exploded around, you
know, mid 90's, late 90's, So for the
past 15 plus years, there's been lots of
research, about the web graph.
I'm sure you won't be surprised to hear
that, you know, around the middle of the
last decade, people got extremely excited
about properties of social networks.
Those, of course, can also be fruitfully
thought of as graphs.
Here, the vertices are going to be
people, and the lengths are going to
denote relationships.
So, for example, friend relationships and
Facebook or the following relationship on
Twitter.
So notice the different social networks
may correspond to undirected or directed
graphs.
Facebook for example corresponding to an
undirected graph, Twitter corresponding
to a directed graph.
So let's now return to the first
interpretation I wanted to focus on,
that where the vertices are in-hosts and
routers and it does represent direct
physical or wireless connections
indicating that two machines can talk
directly to each other.
So going back to that graph, let's go
back to the story where I'm sending an
email to somebody at Cornell.
And this data has to travel from my local
machine to some local machine at Cornell.
So, in particular, this piece of data has
to get from the Stanford gateway router,
in effect to the airport for Stanford's
network to the Cornell gateway router.
So there will be landing airport over on
Cornell's side.
Now it's not easy to figure out exactly
out what the structure of the routes
between Stanford and Cornell look like.
But one thing I can promise you is that
there is not a direct physical link
between the Stanford gateway router and
the Cornell gateway router.
Any route between the two is going to
comprise multiple hops.
It will have intermediate stops.
And there's not going to be a unique such
route.
So if you have the choice between taking
one route which stops in Houston and then
Atlanta and then in Washington D.C.,
how would you compare that to one which
stops in Salt Lake City and Chicago.
Well hopefully your first instinct and a
perfectly good idea is all else being
equal, prefer the path that is in some
sense the shortest.
Now in this context, shortest could mean
many things, and it's interesting to
think about different definitions.
But for simplicity let's just focus on
the fewest number of hops, equivalently
the fewest number of intermediate stops.
Well, if we want to actually execute this
idea, we clearly need an algorithm that
given a source and destination computes
the shortest path between the two.
So hopefully you feel well equipped to
discuss this problem, because one of the
highlights of part one of this class, was
the discussion of Dijkstra's shortest
pathalum rhythm in a blazing fast of
limitation using heaps that run's in
almost linear time.
We did mention one caveat when we
discussed Dijkstra's algorithm mainly
that it requires all edge lengths to be
non negative but in the context of
internet routing almost any edge metric
you'd imagine using will satisfy this non
negativity assumption.
There is, however, a serious issue with
trying to apply Dijkstra's shortest path
algorithm off the shelf to solve this
distributed internet routing problem, and
the issue was caused by the just massive,
distributed scale of modern day internet.
Probably back in the 1960's, when you had
the 12-note ARPANET, you could get away
with running Dijkstra's shortest path
algorithm, but not in the twenty-first
century.
It's not feasible for the Stanford
gateway router to maintain locally a
reasonably accurate model of the entire
internet graph.
So how can we elude this issue?
Is it fundamental that because the
internet is so massive, it's impossible
to run any shortest path algorithm?
Well, the ray of hope would be if we
could have a shortest path algorithm that
admitted a distributed implementation.
Whereby, a node could just interact,
perhaps iteratively, with its neighbors
with the machines to which its directly
connected.
And yet, somehow converge to having
accurate shortest paths to all of the
destinations.
So perhaps, the first thing you'd try
would be to seek out an implementation of
Dijkstra's algorithm, where each vertex
uses only local computation.
That seems hard to do.
If you look at the pseudo-code of
Dijkstra, it just doesn't seem like a
localizable algorithm.
So instead, what we're going to do is
we're going to learn a different shortest
path algorithm.
It's also a classic.
Definitely on the greatest hits
compilation.
It's called the Bellman-Ford Algorithm.
So the Bellman-Ford algorithm, as you'll
see, can be thought of as a dynamic
programming algorithm.
And indeed, it correctly computes
shortest path using only local
computation.
Each vertex only communicates in rounds
with the other vertices to which it's
directly connected.
As a bonus, we'll see this algorithm also
handles negative edge lengths.
Which of course, Dijkstra's algorithm was
not.
But don't think Dijkstra's algorithm is
obsolete.
It still has faster running time in
situations where you can get away with
centralized computation.
Now, it was really kind of amazing here
is that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, it
dates back to the 1950's.
So, that's not just pre-internet, that
pre-ARPANET.
So that's before the internet was even a
glimmer in anybody's eye.
And yet, it really is the foundation for
modern internet routing protocol's.
Needless to say, there's a lot of really
hard engineering work and further ideas
required to translate the concept from
Bellman-Ford to actually doing routing in
the very complex modern day internet.
But yet, those protocol's at their
foundation, goes all the way back to the
Bellman-Ford algorithm.